# Business Analytics
Though there are many interesting research fields that use data analytics, it is businesses that are increasingly looking to hire data scientists; realistically if you end up working in data analytics, the odds are pretty big you will end up in a business setting rather than an academic setting. Academic data analytics differs from business analytics. For instance, where in academics you often try to completely dissect a problem and explain phenomena, in business you are much more interested in whether a business strategy is working or not. Oftentimes you will be busy making dashboards that contain a slew of descriptive statistics. For instance, a company might have a number of KPIs (Key Performance Indicators) and they want you to make sure that they can at any point see if they are on track for hitting those KPIs. Generally this means constructing a dashboard with clear data visualizations.

Though it may at first sight seem like this is much easier than academic data analytics, this definitely is not the case. As a data analyst in business you must consider what might be good things to keep track of, which means you need to develop a pretty good intuition for data. And even if you know what data to track, it is important to know how to report it in a way that is actually useful. You might for instance have a dashboard that reports the monthly revenue, but depending on the business it may or may not be good to report historic revenues alongside it. Data analytics is as much a field of user experience and design as it is of statistics and science.

To further explain why business analytics often is rooted in descriptive statistics we need only think of the composition of a business. Consider a consulting business for IT solutions; they have so many distinct products and partners that there is no sense in trying to capture all the variables that influence the profit margins. Instead it is much more valuable to know how profitable the time spent on a given client is and tweak the relationship with that partner accordingly.

While this approach certainly is prevalent in businesses, it does not mean that all businesses stick to descriptive statistics. Especially companies that offer one single product or solution will try to analyze and predict their value with more rigorous statistical analysis.